hey what's up to me there's a really
interesting parallel between the set of
questions we have to ask ourselves in
becoming vegan if we're raised in a
culture that basically glamorizes the
consumption of meat or meat is not just
something presented as healthy and
necessary but it's also something that's
served ceremonially you know like the
turkey being eaten at Thanksgiving the
special idea of an indulgence or family
meeting you know an important dinner has
roast served that it has roast beef or
what have you as a vegan you have to
question all of the cultural values
assigned to the diet and to different
symbols of health virility what have you
in the culture were raised in and again
I actually do think this is
significantly different for someone who
say grows up as a Catholic in Latin
America the meat-eating cultures of
South America as opposed to even I don't
know a Catholic in France to use the
examples that are not that far off
I mean culturally I think the the
packaging that you know meat-eating
arrives in in Our Lives
can be really different from one place
to the next I definitely thought it was
very different in France than it was in
in Canada and so on and obviously I've
experienced living in Asia various
cultures and countries um to me you know
the value of alcohol alcohol is
something that socially binds people
together alcohol as a very public form
of enjoyment group fealty building and
so on there's so much assigning the to
alcohol the role it has in our lives
alcohol maybe the way you meet members
the opposite sex maybe the way you fall
in love I mean in England you meet so
many people who are really socially
crippled without alcohol
they're only capacity socialising to
make friends really rests on really
relies on being at the pub consuming
alcohol and so on alcohol takes on a
social significance far beyond its
chemical significance
and so I think similarly I say they're
similar what I really mean to say is
that the questioning of the importance
of meat and dairy is parallel to
questioning the importance and value of
alcohol they are parallel that they do
not intersect I completely accept that
drinking alcohol is vegan I also
completely accept the cocaine is vegan
cocaine is from my perspective
legitimately a vegan drug
it's made of a plant now I think
everyone watching this video will agree
that that doesn't mean it's an ethically
simple question of whether or not using
cocaine is a good idea whether or not
it's good idea for yourself for your
brother your sister your father your son
and your daughter and that really is the
context in which we end up questioning
these things most often loved ones and
what have you um I do value the
contribution that a natural vegan is
making partly because I'm terrified by
and revolted by the anti scientific
attitudes that I've encountered amongst
vegans especially vegans from Europe to
be honest you're up in contrast to North
America vegans who convince themselves
that they don't need to use soap they
don't eat you soap to wash their hands
to wash their bodies to wash their
clothing to wash their cutlery their
plates and cups this is reversing one of
the most fundamental advancements in
human civilization and on what grounds
on the idea well procedurally what many
of these vegans have done the lesson
they've taken from veganism is not what
I've just been describing of questioning
the cultural value of something in
contrast to scientific and ethical
considerations that's what I am
encouraging people to do instead many of
these vegans have basically thought that
the lesson of veganism was all of these
cultural values are a conspiracy created
by medical professionals and
corporations who are just trying to
oppress you who are just trying to keep
you down so therefore you're doing
something rebellious
and morally reteaming by refusing to use
soap obviously there's a similar
mentality behind the anti-vaccine
movement however vaccines are probably
an issue in your life less often than
once a year
soap is an issue in your life more often
than once a day and when you really meet
and talk to those people face-to-face
it's a sad feeling of powerlessness you
have because it would be so hard to
disentangle them from the the set of
counterproductive and genuinely
anti-scientific not just
pseudo-scientific anti scientific views
they've adopted and that they've decided
are meritorious because they've decided
believing these things makes them good
people makes them morally superior to
someone who has not adopted these
conspiracy theory views so with all this
having been said and obviously I've
repeatedly stated that I appreciate what
a natural vegan does I think there's an
interesting error she makes it's what I
would call a categorical error I'll come
back to to what that means when she
addresses the use of drugs and alcohol
the - I really remember her speaking
about at length our caffeine and alcohol
why do I say categorical error in the
sciences even including the social
sciences there is this concept of a
category mistake that's not what I'm
talking about that's a specific logical
fallacy but how we categorize things how
we define the outcomes we're looking for
the variables were testing I suppose the
variables we're ignoring can radically
change the outcomes of our inquiries so
if we're asking the question is caffeine
healthy we can answer that question
entirely in terms of does it increase
your risk of cancer does it increase
your risk of mortality you know average
age of mortality and epidemiological
studies we could ask this question
in terms of a long series of check marks
without including the question of does
it disrupt your sleep now obviously I
mean it almost seems laughable compared
to the seriousness of cancer to be
talking about the quality of your sleep
but actually it's a tremendously
important question you know caffeine its
effects on the brain its effects in your
life as a whole even if you're going to
approve of the recreational use of this
drug by saying well the effects on the
heart are trivial the effects on cancer
are relatively trivial the effects on
your liver your kidneys your lungs
I still have serious questions about
caffeine in terms of here's the really
slippery stuff the effects on your
emotions the effects on your mood your
ability to get a good night's sleep your
ability to really be highly proficient
and mentally alert without developing
dependency on it and what you go through
emotionally when you withdraw from the
drug now I'm not saying this to be a
fear monger about caffeine I think the
truth about caffeine is that its effects
are subtle enough that people can ignore
them people can be unaware of them for
years until some particular event
suddenly brings them into focus suddenly
makes them reconsider what a role
caffeine has one of the common remarks
in American culture is why do why do we
always fight on holidays you know
whether it's couples or a whole family
why is it that people get into squabbles
and conflicts when they're suddenly
removed from the routine of the home
let's say stereotypically to drive a
camper van on a vacation or something
like this I think in many many cases
people underestimate the extent to which
interrupting their caffeine use because
they're used to in tied into their their
daily job their school routine that
actually they do get into fights with
their with their loved ones in part
because they're going through a caffeine
withdrawal and they don't even know what
that is they're not even sensitive
enough to feel it and so on now
okay I've got sort of three examples
here I want to very briefly go over but
I've just given an example of how
caffeine may have really meaningful
problems that are unrelated to very real
issues such as carcinogenic effects and
what have you
under alcohol we have the really
tremendously important question of brain
damage that is different from caffeine
caffeine you can look at it sharp can
look at a diagram showing you the
effects caffeine has on your brain
because caffeine does impact your brain
chemistry and you can decide for
yourself if this is a modification to
your brain chemistry that you think
you're willing to toy with in exchange
for the benefits you think you get from
caffeine I think almost nobody who just
sits down and goes through the flowchart
of what are the effects of caffeine in
the brain would feel yeah I'm
comfortable with it the nature of the
brain itself on how we rely on our brain
chemistry I think you know again
obviously I think it's quite possible to
be well scientifically formed about
caffeine and you try to minimize it
rather than eliminate it to try to have
low and moderate use of caffeine but to
really be aware this is something
negative in your life this is something
you got to watch out for it's a
conclusion anyone can come to you'll
understand that however I do it's a case
where the facts speak for itself
and unlike looking at a chart of the
effects on your liver or your kidneys I
don't know anyone who really wants to
voluntarily compromise their normal
brain function that's a really tough
call to make now I can say the same for
alcohol but with alcohol we have the
added very real question of brain damage
we do know and we can measure brain
damage caused by alcohol
and more controversially we can directly
measure brain damage caused by marijuana
use that something most people do not
want to believe the invention of the MRI
scan magnetic resonance imaging made it
possible as never before to precisely
measure and visualize brain damage to
specific lobes of the brain measuring
the specific amount of nerve damage of
tissue loss in the brain caused by
alcohol use now there were estimates of
this before MRI technology became widely
used and by the way it wasn't really the
invention of MRI it was as the
technology became cheaper and cheaper
and more widely spread which was delayed
interestingly by a series of court cases
to try to determine who had the right to
to profit from the technology so
actually I think it was delayed by about
ten years the progress of science in
that area which is a real shame
but anyway MRI wasn't it at a court for
a while to see who owned the copyright
it's scary to admit to yourself that
every time you drink alcohol you are
causing brain damage to yourself and you
should be scared I noticed that we seem
to have an easier time ethically
thinking about these things when they
impact others it doesn't seem to be
difficult to convince people that they
should drink zero alcohol during
pregnancy because drinking alcohol
during pregnancy every dose every drink
even one beer even more that's one every
drink causes brain damage to the unborn
baby it seems to be much more difficult
to convince people that they should not
drink alcohol because every drink causes
brain damage to you the person decided
to drink it now again to me what's
interesting here is that alcohol is
wrapped up in all these cultural values
and those are very hard for people to
question it may be that you've grown up
and the happiest times of your life are
all associated with alcohol and you have
to look at the simple grim reality of
alcohol causing brain damage and get to
reiterate my earlier points this is
totally unrelated to the checklist of
does it cause cancer
what are the impacts on my liver what
are the impacts on my blood circulation
cancer is deadly serious
but another sense brain damage even very
minor brain damage
he's also serious now I quit drinking
alcohol at a very young age I basically
what tricky alcohol when it became legal
for me in Canada as a teenager but I for
instance I know that I have brain damage
caused by using anti malarial drugs
drugs that prevent you from getting
malaria I didn't use them very long I
didn't use very much but yes it is a
very strange thing to live your life and
know that at a specific point you took a
drug even a legitimate pharmaceutical
medical drug that is a real medical
benefit and it caused you brain damage
and change the way you think and feel
forever in the case of marijuana and
alcohol you're talking about brain
damage which is not associated with any
legitimate medical benefit so my advice
to anyone would be to get familiar with
those facts and to make the choice not
to drink less alcohol but to drink
absolutely zero alcohol for those
reasons now the third and final category
I want to address here is time even if
you examine all the categories I've
mentioned from cancer to how well you
sleep at night to the effects on your
mood your relationships your social life
some of these are not easily
scientifically quantifiable and you
decide caffeine is okay and alcohol is
okay there's still a question of time
many people who know me including my
professors friends enemies many people
who know me consider me a highly
intelligent and brilliant person but one
of the things I say to them is you know
I'm only intelligent for a few hours per
day I have a lot of hours that I spend
doing my laundry
cleaning my bathtub
cooking food putting bananas in a
blender cleaning the blender afterwards
I have hours when I'm asleep but when
I'm not really mentally alert because I
just woke up and so on I mostly make
these videos when I'm completely
exhausted and having trouble getting
hard work done that's why I look
exhausted because I am exhausted in so
many of these videos the number of hours
a day when I'm really mentally focused
alert and capable of doing analytical
work creative work etc is not that great
and I think when you talk to serious
creative people serious intellectuals so
on I think most of them can reflect this
is true for them also the amount of time
you lose by drinking alcohol by being
hungover the next day by having a lower
quality of sleep during the night
because you drank alcohol in the evening
before even moderate alcohol consumption
and yeah that has been scientifically
study sleep science is a whole province
of research and which is fascinating by
the way but yes using caffeine during
the day using alcohol during the day it
takes up hours of the day and impairs
your sleep it has an impact on your
intelligence what you can do with your I
was next day I think this question of
time is so fundamental that I would in
this under this category I would compare
cigarettes are II I was gonna say
cigarettes but caffeine and alcohol I
would compare them even to video games
with video games we're absolutely sure
they don't cause cancer they don't cause
brain damage they don't have any of the
negative physiological effects of
caffeine or alcohol they don't have any
chemical effect in your brain
whereas both caffeine and alcohol do
very different chemical effect alcohol
definitely does cause brain damage but
the number of hours you lose in terms of
the struggle to lead a meaningful life
to use your brain in a meaningful way I
think that's so serious a question for
you to ask yourself for you to look in
the mirror and think about in terms of
the time you have did you something
creative and meaningful whatever that is
whatever that is
I think that's such a tremendously
serious question ask that for that
reason alone I think a natural vegan is
dead wrong in encouraging vegans to use
caffeine and/or alcohol I mean I would
ask you how meaningless is your life for
you to waste all your potential as a
human being to the use of these drugs
that are mild and moderate drugs
compared to cocaine and from my
perspective like this is true of
marijuana also what makes them so
problematic is not that they're intense
when people use cocaine they know
they're high on cocaine when cocaine is
destroying someone's life having advice
they know it's having those impacts it's
highly visible subjectively people feel
it their friends and relatives all see
it in a sense drugs like marijuana
alcohol and caffeine they're more
dangerous because they're so close to
invisible both culturally and
subjectively people really may not
perceive the problem at all
for years or decades and only later
looking back or maybe maybe never do
they reconsider what are the impacts and
what are the lost opportunities quit
playing pacman